My name is Philip Bialowicz and I was born in Izbica Poland, near Lublin area and eh I came
from a small town very vibrant community, 99% Jewish. And eh the majority were Chassidi.
They were Chassidic?
Chassidic. And eh the rabbi, the rabbi von, von ×”×™ which [here] a century ago, was, his
name Mortre Josef [rabbi Mordechai Josef Leiner?] he was very famous, he wrote the book,
about the mysticism and the book was translated in eh many languages. He was also advisor
to kings and to the government. He was also advise, eh, not only to Jews but Christians
too. They came for his advise. Eh I came from a family of eh six children, three brothers
and three sisters. Eh we we were, we were religious, but not Chassidic. And my brother,
my, my, my father was very active in the community and one of the leaders.
In what sense?
We, we had eh, we had a business in, in a leather factory
Aha
and eh and eh, I came to the, eh, the leather factory helped
us a little bit survive during the war, because we were
Why?
well, we were producing leather for the Germans. And this postponed our, our eh
Deportation
deportation. Eh, Izbica was a very poor woll (?) community, we didn't have any eh industrial
base and eh the children, the, eh, the, eh, the children eh graduated public school, they had
to go to another city to study or to get a job. Because there was no jobs in Izbica. Eh my brother
Simcha studied to be a pharmacist and eh thank to my brother I am alive today.
I know, I know.
And eh Izbica was very poor and u, my parents used to, used to give money to help for the Shabbat,
to go around to help Jew poor people to, with food for the Shabbat. And also we borrowed money
for no, with no, with no interest of people to be able to survive, to go in business. And eh Izbica
we could, we could speak about Izbica eh days, to tell the story about Izbica before the war and
during the war. But then the war broke out, Izbica became a waystation for the Jews of Europe.
Because, I was told that Izbica was mentioned in the Wannsee Conference, that Izbica should take
a big, big part in the, in the in the liquidation of the Jewish people. Because they brought to
Izbica eh from different eh, from different from different states.
Like Tsjechoslovakia and eh, and, and Germany and with Germany I have a very big stories about Germany.
That the German eh transport came from Germany and the Judenrat assigned a family, name Rosenbergers,
which is in my book, the story about the Rosenbergers, a couple with two daughters and one of the daughters,
Herta, was mine, girlfriend, was a teenager, was mine age. Approximately. Those, we lived together
like eh, like eh, they, like wha, despite the, the, the adjustment was very difficult because of they,
they came from aristatic family, aristocratic family and we were very eh plain people in Izbica. So
it took time to adjustment, but we lived together like one unit.
How did you come to live together? That's not clear to me.
Huh?
How did you come to live together?
So they, they assigned, they assigned
To live with you
the Judenrat assigned the family that we should live toge, they should
Okay
live in our house
because they doesn't, eh, we didn't have enough room to, to give a special eh, facilities.
Hmhm
And eh the Rosenberger used to give me jewelry to go out to sell and they used the money
to live, to live eh, for food and for live together. And eh eh eh the story about very
interesting story, that one day a Mercedes came over in front of the house and the Gestapo
came out with, with, from the, from the car, with a package under his arm
Hmhm
and then he walked in to my house, so I was, I was under the impression that he
came to kill us. A German Gestapo came, came to kill us. I was hiding in the house,
when he came in, the parents, they hug each other and, the, the wife, Rosenbergers
wife made coffee and, and I was hi, I was shaking, how, how
Of course!
I think what is going on here?
Of course
And he eh he made a plan he, I, I understood that he give them a,
a opt.., he, he is assigning a job for him to work in Zamość
Ja?
which is 21 kilometer from Izbica and to work in the airport as an engineer. And they spend, he spend
a half an hour, when he left I asked Herta, my girlfriend, I said, tell me, what's going on? A
German Gestapo comes, you hug each other, you made coffee, tell me what ha, what, what, what, tell
me the truth. She said to me eh, Fischer he was named, Fischer, I cannot reveal the sto, this is
a, this is a, this is a, this is a secret only for the family. So I said your father told me that
I am a member of the family, when the war will be over you'll take me to Germany, and I'll have
a good life. So you shouldn't have any secrets from me. When he came the next time, I insisted
you must tell me. We took a blanket, we went to the forest and she revealed that he is a distant
cousin, he's Jewish. He's a distant cousin, he works eleven kilometers away from Izbica in Krasnystaw,
[geluid op achtergrond] it's between, between Zamość, because.
I know where it is, ja, thank you.
And he helps us and he helps other people here. So I told her, if he is a Gestapo, he must have
on his conscience eh many, eh, maybe he killed many Jews. You know. He said eh Fishełe [Filip]
he is not a murderer, he is a, he works, he is assignment is on transportation from the army to,
to Russia. And eh and then I, I asked, maybe, maybe the Rosenbergers are spies. Maybe they are
working together with him as eh spies. Because when the transports came from Germany, they still,
many of them came with the first, First War, First War medals on them. And they were so eh dedicated
Germans, you know? But I could not, I could not absorb, I could not believe a, a Jewish who would
be a Gestapo, you know? But eh, the, the, he could not save him. They went to Sobibor too. And
he, he, he, he was caught in Krakau and he, he, he was killed. His
Really?
his name is Frenz, was Frenz. Maybe he had a pseudonym, his name was
Fr, Frenz. So this is eh, one of the very important episodes
It is!
which, which eh, I was in the, in the, the, they were interesting to make a, to make a movie out
of this, years ago, about that story. But I couldn't eh, I couldn't go into making movies that
time, it was years ago, because I had a tragedy in my family and eh my head was not to go and make
movies because I lost a daughter, she was seventeen years old. It's in the book and how she wrote
an article about, eh, she wrote herself. She also wrote her own eulogy before she died. She was
very smart, educated and eh she was more concerned about me than about herself.
What did she die from?
She died from bone cancer.
Gosh
From the leg
how terrible.
like the same things like Kennedy still have. Maybe they would amputate her leg, maybe she would
be alive, but eh she is like, was a girl, a beautiful girl, is, eh, eh, there is a picture of it
in the, in the, my book. It was a big tragedy and I didn't go into make any, I didn't
Of course not
I thought not was to go and make movies.
Of course not.
So, I have, I'm go from here back and forward, so I have many
That's okay
ma, many stories to tell about mine experiences, eh, before
the war and during the war and after the war. But the main
Philip, when you talk about this, this wo, girl, did
she become your girlfriend, this woman Rosenfield?
From Germany?
Yes
She, she was mine age. A young girl. Two, two sisters and she became my girlfriend.
Sure
And we were talking, it's in the book everything, we were talking about the future,
but, eh, but the parents, they said like I'm a member of the family.
Sure. I'm just asking.
Yeah.
How large was your family?
Huh?
How many brothers and sisters did you have?
There was two sisters in (?) two sisters. So the you read the book, the whole
story about it, eh, and eh, they had, I have their pictures in the book.
Yeah, but the people who look at this video, they don't have the book, so, I'm
sorry [laughs], they, they don't have it at this moment, so, let us try to
In the book you can buy it, they, they can, they, they, they, they can
Sure, I will, I will
buy, they can buy my book
I promise to mention it, absolutely, I show a picture from the book when it's out
Yeah.
No, no question about it. I mean, I do what you want.
Izbica all Izbica should be a cemetery. What happened during the war in Izbica, that's indescribable.
Where many thousands of people died and they were shot. Izbica could not absorb so many thousands
of people. Because be, be, because of the sanitary reasons, no health department. Even the doctors
died, typhus developed, even the doctors died with the patients. And eh many, many of them died from
Engels in camp, you know, eh, you know the story about Engels from Izbica.
No?
Tom Blatt told you about Engels?
No, he didn't.
Huh?
He didn't.
Engels was a, was a Gestapo, who was assigned to Izbica, the other one guy was Klemm. The,
the, the Engels, he had, he, every morning he had to, he had to shot ten, fifteen people,
and in the afternoon, this was his his satisfaction. And he was a murderer.
Oh
And eh and eh, and, and also he was helped by, by, by, by the Volksdeutsche Schulz. I don't know
if Toivi Blatt told you about the Schulz. Schulz was a watch maker before the war. In Izbica. But he
was a Volksdeutch. I write in my book, when I went to I went to, to pay him my, my father's watch,
you know, when I came to pick up my watch and eh when I paid for him, he said eh, in, he said, he said
instead in Polish Dziękuję he said danke schön. When I, when I paid him (?) and he was a big murderer.
He was a, he was a helper to Engels, the Gestapo. Fact is eh, it's, it's a very funny thing with
the Engels that after the war he went to Hamburg and he opened a café with a Jews eh, with a Jewish
partner. And eh, they, they arrested him, he committed suicide in the, in, in jail. Engels. So there
is many my mother my mother was shot in Iz, Izbica in, on the cemetery with a group of people. I was
also put to, under the firing squad with a group of people and
In the what?
from the fi, firing squad
yes, in the firing squad, yes?
and when they started to shoot I fell down and I made believe that I'm dead. People fall on, by, on
top of me, they were injured, they, they were not even dead yet. And there was all blooded and, but
I made myself a s, place to, a spot to, to breath. And after they left I went down from the cemetery
to the city down, eh, and it was on a hill, you know the cemetery of Izbica? And eh from the transport
it was like a pogrom all kinds of clothing, so I, I, I put on an old dress and I washed myself on the,
for I was blooded. And I came back I came back to the hiding place all my family was there. Because
I went out from the hiding place to get water, because my, my mother got sick and my sisters gave her
compresses with urine. So there was no water. I couldn't, I couldn't stand, I couldn't eh, eh,
this. So I went out to get water, the, so the Polish eh firemen caught me, they took me to the Gestapo
and they took us out to the cemetery and they, they shot us. And they didn't know what happened to
me. I came back ten o'clock at night, back. I didn't even tell them what happened, I didn't want
to, eh, my mother should know what happened to me, that I was shot. So it's a, the experiences what
I went through in Izbica during the war is indescribable and it's, it's, it's impossible to de,
to, to describe what, what happened in Izbica. So many people died from hunger, from, from, from s,
from typhus and, and, eh, by, by executed, by shooting them.
You were born in which year?
Huh?
In which year you were born?
I was born eh, on, de, December 25, '25.
So you were fifteen when the war broke out?
Yes, yes. So I was a teenager. So eh, coming to eh, I was working in Izbica s, Simcha was
working in the hospital and he was like a, like a, the assistant of the doctor, he eh, had
a pharmacist and, and eh, and they made me as a disinfector. To go around and dis
He told me, he told me
Yes?
yes
Dis, disinfect eh, the houses. With the, with the, with eh, with one, with one of the doctor's son.
Because after they, eh they took the people out to, to eh, to the, to Belzec and Sobibor. Belzec and
Sobibor were, a, were approximately the same distance. Two deathcamps and the, and the location Izbica
was very good for the Germans to transportation. You know, with the, with the railroad.
Did you know
Huh?
what Belzec and Sobibor were when you were still in Izbica?
We knew Belzec and Sobibor. We knew this is two deathcamps.
You knew
You know, most of the Jews, Polish Jews knew that the deathcamps, this is this is deathcamps. People
from Holland, they didn't know that's a deathcamp, because, because, when I tell you I'm
going to go into to, to, to Sobibor, I tell you the story about, about the beginning how they arrived
everything. So eh so Izbica they came in 1943, Izbica became Juden, Judenrein.
Yes
In 1942. So, many Jews escaped to the woods in the winter they were frozen and f, f, frozen white,
so they, they wanted to make, the, the Germans wanted to have it and they wanted to have them
in one place. To made Judenstadt. But this was temporarily only. So with Judenstadt they made,
was about few hundred people in Izbica left. And I and my brother and two sisters and a niece
were still alive. My mother was shot and one sister, my father was, took, was taken to Sobibor
and my, my, one of my sisters with a, with a little boy, also to, they took them to Sobibor. So
we remained, part of the family was still alive. When the Warsaw ghetto uprising started they
liquidated all the ghettos in Poland. And they came and they, they, they find us, we had a hiding
place underground, in the factory from the, from the leather factory. And the German, the Polish
people they knew that there is a lot of Jews here. That they went in with the, they went with
the ears to listen, to the walls. You know? But with children, we didn't have any air yet inside,
so they find us and they took us out, the Germans, and they took us to the market place and they
couldn't make a transport with the trains, so then, so they had trucks. Trucks, and they put
us on the trucks and they took us to, to Sobibor. And
Can we
before we went to Sobibor, they stopped in Travnika. They were going to let us into,
Trawnika, but the Trawnika did not accept us. So eh Travni, if I would have go to Trawnika,
I wouldn't, I wouldn't be here today, because they killed 20,000 Jews right after
the, after they escape. They, they, they executed 20,000 eh Jews.
Can I, can I come back one moment to Izbica your life there before we go to Sobibor. Eh,
what kind of life did you have, did, what kind of future did you expect for yourself?
Izbica, like I mentioned, was a vibrant Jewish community. Izbica did not the most of the people,
the Jewish people, most of them were poor. They didn't have, they, they didn't have any money
to live. The, the most of they live from, eh, charities. Because there was no eh, there is no
jobs, eh, most of them were Chassidic, you know, and eh, (?) a few people which, which managed
to, to eh, didn't got, (?) like mine, my, my parents, my father. He was a monetary, he was not
that old, but he, but then I made, he tried to help other people to survive.
What did he do?
He was, like I mentioned, he had a leather factory.
Yes, he was
Yes
the owner, yes
Leather factory and eh, we managed a little better than the other people.
We were not, we are not rich, but we were, we were, we, we were eh, we had
a little better, be, better eh financial ex, better existence.
Did you expect to study, eh, like Simcha?
Well, I, most our, our children and my, my, most of the family when, when, when we, when we graduated
eh public school, we went to big city, to a bigger city to Warsaw, to study and to get jobs. I was
yet too young, I was very young. I didn't even, I didn't even finish the school, the public
school and during the war my father made sure that I, that I get private lessons, which is in my
book. Private lessons from a tutor. Eh, and eh and eh religious le, religious and and general lessons.
You know? And he w, he was very concerned that you should have education. Education was my parent's
paramount. So as, eh, if the war wasn't be broke out, I would have go probably to, to over, to,
to Warsaw, so this is my, my sisters went to Warsaw already and she start to, to work and to, and
to make money to go to, to continue to, to studies. So eh
Did she remain in Warsaw eh
He remained in Warsaw, my sister, eh, my, one of my sisters, Broncia, remained in Warsaw with my two
brothers. Simcha and Jacob. I had two brothers, one brother died eh about three years ago in Israël.
He, he escaped to Russia eh in 1939 and he came back from Russia, he was electrical engineer. And the
reason that he survived, that he didn't, he didn't eh signed up to go back. To Poland. Many of
them were back to Po, signed to go back and they send them to Siberia. But he was working in a, astronomically
institute in Moscow and when the, when the Germans got close to Moscow, they, they evacuated the, the,
the institute to Jambo. To this is eh, Jambo I think is Kazakhstan.
Ja
And he survived, and right eh after the war, he s, he sends a letter to the, to the, to the
gmina, to the, to the, to the, to the City Hall in Izbica to find out if anybody is alive from
my family. So we answered him and we were living in that time in Zamość. And he came, he,
he got married, he came back to Zamość, we to the station, he wouldn't recognize me. Because
when he left I was a little boy, now I were already grown up, you know.
But you said he didn't opt to go back, okay, that was in 1940, no, I try to understand
19, 193
the fast story
1940, so he was there till 19, in Russia, till 1944. We were liberated in 1944
Sure
by Ru, the Russians. And eh, so, coming back, now, to they, they took us to Sobibor, they stopped
in Travnika, they would not accept us, we went to Sobibor, we, so we knew this is, I knew this is
our last destination. This is a deathcamp. I came to Sobibor with my brother Simcha, two sisters and
a niece. My brother Simcha grabbed my hand and he went over to the Gestapo, he said he's a pharmacist
and I'm his assistant. So they gave their approval and they stond, told us to wait in the side,
with other trades people. They asked for professionals and trades people and there were among us.
So eh we said goodbye to our sisters, to our niece, even my eight year old niece came over to hug
me. She knew that, that she's going to die. The next day a, a neighbor of our town told Simcha that
he cut the hair of my, of my sis, our sister Broncia. And she asked him how long it will take the
gas to kill us. He could not answer her because he was surrounded with the Germans, he could not talk
to them and when he told and I find out, I, I was figuring how, how, how, how bad they felt, the agony
they had to go through, you know, they knew they are going to die. But eh, I knew I came to Sobibor
I knew that, that this is the last destination, I would not survive Sobibor. But in the same talking
I was, I was a teenager and I wanted to live. So so mine, mine, my mind is maybe there would be a
miracle, maybe I will survive and to be able to take revenge. You know? And eh, I was working on different,
different jobs. I even was cutting the hair of woman from Holland and they asked me not to cut their
hair too short. They still till the last
Terrible
ti, till
I can imagine
still to the last moment they did not realize that this is the end.
But your nie, your sister knew?
Huh?
Your sister realized she was going to be killed?
My, my sister, sure, she, they, they knew it
And
but, but from Holland, from Holland, the transport came from Holland and eh I,
I, I helped them with the baggage and they, they, and they offered me a tip.
That was you, yes?
My heart was bleeding. I knew the truth. That in a half an hour they will be reduced to ashes.
Did you know it happened by gas?
Did you know how they were killed?
Yeah, they, I knew that they are going to be gassed, every
You knew?
every, every day was a transport they gassed and you, and you couldn't see, they all,
they, they from, from, from, from the burning eh eh from the bur, from the ashes, you know?
It's, it's eh eh, it's eh, I knew, but they did not realize till the last minute.
When they told them to to leave their purses, they started maybe to have, realize something,
something wrong, because they have their medicines, they have their, their, their money,
their pictures, they didn't, they did not, didn't want to, to, to eh
Separate
separate from them. So eh, they bea, were beating, there, they were beated them and they, they, they
had to leave everything. Then they went to a courtyard and eh and one of the Gestapo personal officers
gave a little lecture. In eh, in, like a, in a satanic way. He said they had them, I welcome you and
eh I a, I apologize for the, for the g, inconvenience in travel, that you, that you, that you cannot
go to the living quarters to relax right away. But because of the typhus you had, had to be disinfected.
So, but before you undress, I strongly recommend that you send home postcards to your dear ones. That
you are in a nice place, in a resettlement place. They were clapping and, and some of them eh they
were, were screaming 'bravo'! They did not realize till the last minute. And then when they went
to the, to the, to the, to the, to the, way to the, to the third camp, the gas chambers, was a kiosk,
they took watches and jewelry and they gave them fictitious number receipts, eh, that, that, when they
returned they would get it back. So it was, they, they, they, they, they worked the examinations, they
did it with precision, everything, you know.
Yes, they did
And eh, but I worked in different places, I worked  sorting, and many jewels, there was a big
safe, I had to throw everything to all the jewels. But 99% of the jewels I wanted to have, eh,
I did not want to help the Nazi war machine. So 99% I throw into the toilets. Around every times,
you throw in the toilet this, this gave me some satisfaction. I knew I'm not going to survive,
at least I got satisfaction that I, this is like I sabotaged them. You know?
Simcha told me you stayed very close to him.
Yeah. We, we were very close. You know, Simcha, you know eh Simcha were a, when eh before the
uprising, a day before Simcha gave me a bottle of cyanide poison and a compass. In case I get
injured on the on the, on the up, on the revolt, I should commit suicide because they buried
people alive, if I survive the compass would show me how to go east. So, I'm dropping back
and forth, but you are going to, you are going to eh eh edit it and everything (?)
No, it's wonderful what you are telling, it completely makes sense
The, the uprising in Sobibor will go in, in the annals in history. It's
Would you
one of the most successful uprising in World War II. And Sobibor, we put Sobibor on the map. Nobody
knew about Sobibor. Because Sobibor was a top secret camp. Surrounded by barbed wire, watch towers
with Ukrainian machine guns, though, this was the only camp which was mined all around. So Sobibor,
there was no way anybody can go out of of Sobibor. But our aim was that maybe, maybe one person
should get out from Sobibor and tell the world what happened here. Because Sobibor, we knew about
Belzec, Treblinka, Dachau, Buchenwald, Majdanek, Sobibor was not known.
I know
And Sobibor was the most secretive camp. So
When you say you, you cut hairs, if I may interrupt you, have you ever been in camp III? In where?
In camp III?
No, I was not, I was very close to camp III.
But you never were in
If I would go too close I couldn't go back. You know. We were in camp II and
I. So we couldn't, we, we, we, we didn't have any contact with camp III.
Camp III was the gas chambers?
Camp III was the deathcamp and we, when I cut the hair, I was only maybe ten, fifteen feet away
from the, from the, eh, from the, from the go, to the gas chambers and to the third camp.
Did you have to work very hard? Or was it soso
I worked very hard and, and, and, and, and eh, and the, I was beating, I was whipped.
You were
Yes eh from, from Frenzel and eh I eh, and Wagner, there is a lot of stories about Wagner, about
Frenzel that's, which is, it's very eh difficult to go through the experiences because if I eh,
once a transport came from the Białystok area and the transport was eh, on the way for two, two
weeks maybe and it was on a Sunday and they took me with another young boys to help unload the train.
And then I opened the door, and I saw the scenery, I, I couldn't, I couldn't eh, I couldn't
go through this things. People were weighing eh maybe a few hundred, tones, falling out decomposed,
bodies, babies are weighting maybe a hundred pounds and when, when they told us to take out the bodies,
when I started to grab a woman, to, to pull out the, the, the skin remained in my hands. So I decided
I, I lay down on the floor, I figured I'm, I'm going to die here anyway, why should I go through
those, those terrible experiences, I wanted to be shot. Frenzel came over, I testified in court in,
in Hagen, about this episode. He came over, he beat me up, he told me to back to work. And he made
a picture and he said what a wonderful Bild this is. And that woman with the baby was laying on her,
w, on, on, on her tum. It's eh, I still have nightmares about that episode. So eh this is one of
the episodes to go through with Sobibor what I went through, but I wanted to live, maybe will take
the revenge, if we do something.
Can I ask you another question? When your brother decided to go to Russia, eh, in '39 or in '40
Yes?
did you have a chance to make that kind of decision, or you didn't consider to go east
Me?
yes
I was too young.
Okay.
I was too young, I was a young boy, I was going to school. If I was a year older, like eh, then,
I would go to Warsaw too, like all my family. Most often the people that got the, after they
finished public school, they went to study in Warsaw and to, to, but eh, but I, I was too young.
And one of my sisters was too young. One sister went already. Two brothers
To Warsaw?
one sister
But
two, two brothers, one sister were already in Warsaw. But I'm, was still with one of
my sisters, was still in, in, du, eh, during the war, we were still in, in eh Izbica.
No, but I'm talking about your brother who went east.
My brother was in, eh, in, he went to Warsaw too and he, he became electric engineer.
Yes, but he also went to the Soviet Union, didn't he?
He went to the, this brother, Jacob, he went to the Sovjet Union.
This is, only, the, two brothers, Simcha and Jacob.
Yes, sure
This brother went to, to Russia and I remained with Simcha with the two sisters, in Izbica. So eh
then they came to Izbica from Warsaw, they ca, when, when the war ended, 1939 for, they came to Izbica
and we were together. So Simcha started to work in the hospital, in the medical field
Mine, family was not eh, we are not only were eh, were eh worked in the, in the, in, in the leather,
leather producing. We also baked matzes from generation to generation. And eh not for mo, make money,
but for the community. Whoever could afford, whoever couldn't afford, he didn't pay nothing.
And eh I, and eh, I, when I was a little boy, my first job by the matzes, my mother used, my mother
picked ten, twenty girls, beautiful girls to eh, to roll the, the matzes.
Yes
it's a lot of work
Twenty girls, and my job, my, as a young boy, my job was,
the first job was to to measure the, the flour.
Wait a second. It was your job to, to m (?)
My first job was to measure the flour and to put it to
one lady and then she made eh the dough, you know?
Yeah
a girl, for, for twenty, for twenty eh girls, to, to, eh
To cut it
yes, eh, my, then after a, after a, after a while I eh, the, the next year I advanced,
I put water to the, to, to, she made I put water in. This was eh, and the third
job was one, to make holes, holes to the, the matzes, you know?
You know, one of my very early memories is
Yes and my fourth, my fourth job, my aim was the, the, to have a biggest, the biggest honour.
[laughs[
the accomplishment I should put the matzes in to the oven.
SpSL [laughs]
But I could not, the war broke out and I did not accomplish this.
[laughs]
You know? With my aim, you know? So this was the matzes.
My first, one of my earliest
Ma, matze, matze maker
memories
then in our house also we had a big oven, so, from most of the city people came
to put in the oven, the Cholent, the Cholent for the, for the, for Shabbat.
Sure.
And, and when they came back from the, from the services, from the Shul,
they picked up the, the Cholent. You know? And eh, so it's eh, this is
memories, historical memories, what happened eh before the war.
Did it, did it happen because you had a big fire in the, in the factory, because eh, I can imagine
No, we, we made, the special, the, was a big oven and we, we made the
You make it specially
we made, we made it specially, we, we, we, we heated up the oven, it should be hot
Ja?
and then the flavor was going around with every time we put in and, and, and they,
and put the matzes in. And, and eh, and to each, the first, the first matzes we made
for more, eh the first oven was for more prestigious for prestigious people.
Ja?
For the matzes, you know. This is the first, the first oven. The first, the first eh, and then we had
a, eh, eh, in, in a, a big sheet with, with the, with, with, with a big thing and two people were carrying
the matzes home. You know? This was the, this was the old fashioned transportation.
Sure
Yes. Yes?
Fantastic
You, you know what I mean, it's eh, it's, it's like a big sheet and the matzes,
they put in the matzes inside and with, with a big eh and two people were carrying
the matzes home. Every, every, every hour, every two hours was a, was a
A new load
Yes. And, and, and, and the war, the, we didn't have any, any eh new, a new system how to get water,
so the water had to go from, we had to get from the wells. So we were carrying water from, from the
well, from the wells with, with two, with two pails you know, like getting the water to the, to be
able to, to, to, to make the, the, the matzes. Before the, before the, a day before the Pesach the
rabbi came with a, with a group of Chassidic people in to eh check the kosher that eh we, everything
should be eh, should be, everything should be in order. Everything should be eh made properly. It's
like eh, it's like eh, an commission, you know, like a, like a eh health department, came to, to
see if everything is okay. I remember a thing, I remember an episode that my mother once opened my,
it is in my book, and my mother opened one chicken and she saw something, something is wrong, they,
they had an ulcer there some place in the chicken, in the chicken. So she took, she send me to the
rabbi to check it out. The rabbi was like a doctor. I came to the rabbi, he took the chicken and fifteen
minutes he examined it like, like, like, like, like an internist. And after fifteen minutes he came
over, he say, he took my chick, Fishele like this, go home, tell your mother she can cook the chicken.
So this is a, little stories, you know, which eh, which is very, very important. That's why that
professor in Warsaw, he was telling the students, you know, about the, historical things, small little
things, they don't, the young people they don't know eh, all those things, you know. So this is
a, and eh so this was eh, also in, in our house eh, eh, bypassing rabbi's when they went to city
to city, they stayed in our house. You know? And eh and eh we discussed the future, we know the Germans
already, we heard on the radio what's eh
You knew
Hit, Hitler, what he speaks about the, the Kristallnacht and this, and we talked to the rabbi he, the
rabbi said that we, we will have miracles like, like from Egypt. They would, will take us out and we,
we sur, we survive. I couldn't, I couldn't eh I couldn't eh I couldn't say to the rabbi because
he was a rabbi and I - young boy, I knew eh, not by miracles, I know that they are miracles, there are
not going to come miracles, miracles you heard, you heard about Korah in Israël, we had Samson eh [?Delaj
Samson, you have big people, they didn't wait till till, for they, they took their own eh, their own
eh, their hands, their own future of the hands. Like the Maccabees, you know? So I, I couldn't eh
go against the rabbi to (?), he was but, but he he said we will, we will see, we survived, we survived
on the, the Egypts and we survive now too, it should be a miracle.
Did you know about the Warsaw uprising?
No the Warsaw uprising
The ghetto
when they
I'm talking
they, they took, when the Warsaw uprising took place, we knew and the, the
How?
they liquidated, I mentioned, the, then they liquidated all the ghetto's
Yes, sure, but how did you continue?
The, our, our eh, uprising in Sobibor, eh, was eh second in scope after the Warsaw ghetto
Yes
Sobibor
Yes but
they come from the camps. You know?
Yes, I know
Se
I know
second in scope
But I was wondering how did you know about the Warsaw uprising?
We heard people, Polish people told us.
Aha
You know, we, we, we, we had
They came through Izbica
Yes, because people, some eh, one policeman told my brother, you know. We knew, we knew.
When did you see the Germans coming? Did you see, can you remember when you saw them the first time?
The Germans came, they were marching in 1939 they went into Izbica, they were marching, they
were singing, German military songs, nicely dressed up, I was I was shaking, you know, and
You were in the street?
Huh?
Yes, in the beginning, in the beginning here you know, they didn't eh, right
away they didn't make eh the, the prosecution right away, they took a little
while. Till they cut my, my, my, my, my father's beard, they cut off.
They did?
They cut off my father's beard, he came, he came home one day without a beard. You know. He said
they caught him in, in the street and then they cut the h, the Wehrmacht. They, they cut his beard
and many other eh Chassidish people from Izbica. So eh, it started little by little till ti, till the
till the, they, they started to, really to send the people to the extermination camps. But eh Sobibor,
the uprising in Sobibor, this is very important. The uprising in Sobibor wa, wa, the architect of the
uprising was Leon Feldhendler. He, he made a plan. With the, he made a plan with precision. But and
I was with, with my brother, Simcha, we were in the forty organizers. And eh I had to swear, swear,
my brother took me in, I had to swear that I would not re, I would not reveal eh secrets, because we
were afraid only, eh, other, they shouldn't come, they shouldn't find out. I, I had to swear that
I will keep my secret, (?) But we didn't have any military knowhow, how to execute the plan. So a
miracle came, that a transport came and this transport had many Russian Jewish POW's. And they eh
took out eighty people to help us to help us with the, with the work on the, on the trans, transports
in the, in, in, in the camp. So this was a this, this was a fatal mistake from the Germans. We needed
we needed people with eh, with military experience. Because we were Jews, we never fought, we never
had any weapons in our hands. And this is the people, they will help us in the revolt. So Leon Feldhendler
got in contact with with a, with one of the, the lieutenant, Sasha Pechersky and he was eh, he became
the military leader of the camp, because he had his own group of people and there was three, three,
three people to, to a group and eh, and I was assigned to be a messenger. One of the other few messengers,
I was a messenger that had to call in, call in the Germans to the, to the places that they find some
nice leather coats, boots that they should come to try it on. When they came in with axes and knifes,
we killed them and we took away their weapons. One was a Germans Wolf, when, when he went in to try
on and I was outside, I was waiting a few minutes, I wanted to see the results, what happened. I went
in to that eh warehouse, I saw, I saw Wolf laying on the floor, all blood around and my brother and
eh one of the, one of the Russian POW's were dragging him in to hide him in between the clothes.
I felt, I was shocking, I, I felt eh satisfaction and I said to myself this is for my family.-
Sure.
This is for the 250,000 of our brothers and sisters who perished in Sobibor. At least whatever will
happen, at least I had the satisfaction that we took revenge. And we we were, we, we, we cut electricity,
telephone so they shouldn't have, the German shouldn't have any communications with eh, with the
garrison in Lublin. So eh, so we, we killed eleven in the same way. We killed eleven Germans and a few
Ukrainian, Ukrainian. And we came, we, we, we got together in the appeal together and
Appelplatz, yes
op appel, and eh most of them don't know yet what happened. You know, only, only the, the, the conspirators
knew about what, what's going on. So Sasha and Leon went on the table and they made a statement.
They said brothers, our destiny has come. Let us rise and destroy this place. We have nothing to lose.
At least we will fight with honor. It's better to die by bullet than die by, by gas. But, if somebody
should survive bare witness and tell the world what happened here. So, we started to run to the, to
the barbed wire my finger, I still have the scar, my finger was cut
I see
I still have the scar and, what he killed, we had to, we had to, after the barbed wires, we had
to go through the mine fields. So and the, the mine field started to explode, it's like Stalingrad.
So it came to my mind maybe I should run in the direction where they have their, where the SS
has their, their building erected. Their living quarters. I figured they are not going to put
the mines near their buildings. So I was running in that di, and I think this was, this was mine
eh luck, and my brother probably also was the same direction. And we went and we, and I eh, and
I ran out in the woods and I met with, met up with my brother.
By accident?
So h
Did you agree where to meet eh
I had, no, I, by accident, I am eh, it was also a miracle. By accident eh I find my brother in the
woods. So eh hundred and sixty eh was killed during the uprising, you know, the hundred and forty
were executed later and three hundred escaped. But from the three hundred who escaped only forty eight
survived. Because of the circumstances on the Polish countryside. You know the story.
Let me
Now we only eight survivors left. But eight.
No, eleven. Eleven.
Eleven? So eh, now I am only one of the few, few survivors left and, and I promised eh Sasha Pechersky
that I will, I will eh tell the story with the, what he said in the last minute. If somebody should
survive, bear witness. Here I am Sasha, a living witness to both the horror and triumph of history.
And as long as I have breath in my longs I will continue to go around all over the world, to the museums,
to schools, to churches and to tell the inspirational story about Sobibor.
And right you are!
Huh?
You are very right.
Yes, okay.
Congratulations, you are very right! I want to ask you a question, Sasha, Simcha
Yes
told me that they tried to poison
Oh, this is
the SS; do you have
This, this story
the story, because
in the book.
he, he couldn't get it very clear.
The story is in the book. The story is that eh, that he was working the pharmacy
and he prepared poison for that eh, for somebody was working in the kitchen,
to poison the the SS and also the, the Ukrainian kitchen too.
Aha
and eh there was one, yes, he Wagner came in and, when they find out no, this was, then, then then one
girl was working in, in the kitchen, by the Ukrainian kitchen, and there was one Ukrainian which, he
was eh he was very more liberal. And she wanted to save his life. She told him not to come in to eat
it today. Yes. And he, he gave, he, he gave out the whole secret and they came to Simcha in the, in,
in the pharmacy there and the Wagner and they beat him up, he ask him if he gave the poison. He said
he didn't and every things he said is, is numbered, numbered, every things is, they hold, every things
he has to be is signed out, it couldn't be from here. Only, it could be only from, from, from, the,
from the baggage, somebody took it out. But then, eh, it was very, some miracle that the, the, the, the
supervisor came in and he saw what's going on with Wagner so he was afraid maybe that, that if this,
if, if Simcha did it, then, then he would be responsible too, you know?
Sure, sure, sure
He is a supervisor. So he protected Simcha, he said, he said it couldn't be from here.
Every milligram of poison is being registered, every things is here (?) it couldn't be
from here. And, and this manager, the Gestapo helped, helped Simcha not to be executed from
Wagner. So this was the story is more of a, is more eh, (?) in my book. (?)
Whom did they execute?
Huh?
Did they exe, execute others for this (?)
They, they executed the, the, the, the over there the girl and the, and
the eh, eh, the, there was, the people who work in the kitchen. Yes.
So this was eh episode also that's very important you know.
Can you tell me about the meetings you had with the
group of forty men preparing the uprising? Did you
Well in the group we
meet often?
we had, we had eh, we had eh meetings every couple of days. We had
meetings and we had to have the meetings in secret. You know?
Sure.
And we, we were eh how, eh, Feldhendler were, were outlined, outlined how the how the, the uprising
should take place. And we had eh all input, we asked questions was, about who was, like you have,
how to be, how, how, how we should eh, enq, enq, acquire the knifes, axes, you know? So that one
eh the Schmeissner, you know Schmeissner from, from eh Brazil, he was working in the, in, in a,
in the magazines eh, they, where he make the jewelry at machines in the eve, was preparing the knifes.
Axes. You saw in the movie, you know, what it is. It is in Escape from Sobibor, it is in the movie.
So we, eh, eh, how we should hide the things to bring it in under the, under the eh, under, and
under, under the underwear, to bring it into hide, the, all the, eh, the weapons, axes and knifes.
And eh we had eh, the, the plan was how we should call in the assignment, the assignment, that,
who I should call in to try on, and the other guy had to, the other fellow's address to, to, to,
eh, to eh, to bring in the s Germans to those places.
Had you any idea what you would do after the uprising?
Oh, this is a very good question. I was eh interviewed by the eh Entertainment Tonight, you know
Yes
it's a show entertainment, you know the show
Entertainment Tonight and, and this eh journalist asked me, Philip how did you manage to survive
after the war. After the uprising. So I said it's a very good question, this was not the end of
my journey. I still had to struggle another year. Till I got liberated by the Germans. I was in
het Partizans and I was hiding with a, with a Catholic Jewish family, their name Mazurek. They sacrificed
their life to keep me and my brother hidden in a barn in the farm. And after the war I made them
Yad Vashem. I made them the medals. And eh I go every year there I go to the, the father is eh not
alive and then I go to the cemetery, bring flowers and I pay respect, they, they really there was
not too many, but whoever did it they was like a heroism. Because
But
they could be killed.
let us, let us go step by step. You went to the woods, you met your brother.
We went, I went to the woods with the, I met my brother,
he went with the, we joined a Partizans, but the
How did you, how did
Parti
you meet them?
Partizan, we met the Partizans and we joined them, but we had to escape because we were in danger
with the Partizans. Because they were more, they didn't, they didn't eh, they, they, we are
afraid they are going to kill us. Because we are Jews, you know? So we escaped from the Partizans
and we were going to eh, to our eh area and we find a place to hide on that eh family.
But can you
And after the war, after the war, you know, the first, the first day I came out on the the first
day I came out eh on the street with my friend, the, the sun was eh shining, a policeman came
over, he said, he asked for the documents Polish policeman. I explained him in Polish, eh, I
said we, we don't have any documents, you know, we are Jews. We just eh, we are liberated
now. He took us to the, to the police station, undercover?] there where the NKWD, where the
old eh, the secret police, and he told them that we are spies. And they throw us into the basement
with all the criminals. I thought when I be liberated they'll take me on a, on a wagon and
they to, take me city to city, here is a survivor from Sobibor.
[laughs]
Here, here are the, here I am laying in the, eh, eh, as a criminal in the, the, in the basement
with eh, eh, in jail. You know? This was one of mine eh first first experience after the war. You
know. And we were, we were, we had a group op people eh concentrated in a, in a Peretza house,
Peretza house, they're, they're like the Peretza [a writer: I.L. Peretz], you know.
Hmhm
Everybody is telling their experiences how they went through eh at night, the Polaks passed
by, they throw in a grenade. The grenade would go inside, we would be all killed, but only
pieces went in, a woman got injured. So we were, we, we, we, we, we were, we were not, we
were not eh, eh after the war already we, we were in danger to be killed.
How did you get out of the prison?
The, what?
Oh, the prison, mine eh, mine mine eh, somebody went to Lublin to the government and they told
the whole story, you know, and they, they got and they took, they let us out. You know.
Okay.
And I escaped and I went to eh I went to eh, to Lublin, the, the, the, the, the Russian told us, in,
eh, eh, that we should concentrate in the big cities. You know. So we all be more safe in the big cities.
But I didn't eh I didn't want to stay in Poland so when, it was 19 already, 1945, the beginning
so, and so we, I went to Germany. To Berlin. It was eh, eh, DP camp. Schlachtensee. The name of the
camp was Schlachtensee, it was eh, and I went there as a DP, as a Displaced Person. I stayed in Schlachtensee
and then I went to, to Heidenheim, near Stuttgart and over there, in Germany I went to school, I was,
then a half a day I went to, to work with a German, eh, a dentist and I wanted to be a dentist. And
I started my work, and I, I, I, after two years I knew all the profession, eh, so my brother, one of
my brothers was eh Jacob was eh, the leader of the, the camp, 3000 DP camp in Heidenheim. He gave me
an apartment and I opened my office. Dental office. And I was working, I was a young boy, I had eh,
made money, I had two motor cycles, I lived like a king. And I was going to go to Palestine that time,
was no Israël yet. So my brothers went first, because they were Zionist, president of the Zionist organization
and they send me a letter I should not come, because they are already in the army, they were already
fighting with the Arabs, when I come to, when I will come to Palestine, they'll take me right into
the army and nobody be left from Bialowicz family from two hundred people. So I should go to America.
So I registered to the Joint distribution. To America and they send me a contract to go to Columbus,
Ohio. So I came to Boston, and from Boston they shipped me to Columbus. In Columbus I was working as
a dental technician, because I didn't have the, all the mine eh, finished yet. My dental eh and eh
in Columbus, Ohio I couldn't eh I couldn't adjust myself. Because I didn't have any eh, any eh
social life. I was a young boy
You were alone
Huh? So, so I, I had a job I bought a car, didn't have any money, I went into the bank, I was (?) they
gave me a, they ga, they gave me a loan and I bought a new car for hun, thousand four hundred dollars.
It was a brand new Chevrolet, I went to Canada and from Canada I came to New York and I met many friends
and I decided to move to New York. I came back to Columbus, Ohio, I told the boss that I decided to move,
he called me into the office, he said Philip you are like a member of our family, sooner or later you'll
take over the whole operation. If you want more money, we give you more money, stay here, stay here.
I said it's not the money, it's not, the adjustment, I cannot adjust myself. And eh he said, well,
stay with us two weeks, you bring somebody in your place and eh, we pay for the transportation. If you
ever decide to come back, the door is open for you. It was very nice of them. I came to New York and
I eh decided that, at once I couldn't become a, a dentist, I switched to jewelry. I went to, to a jewelry
factory and I told them I had five years experience. I didn't have five days. They said come one day
and we'll try out. So a whole weekend I couldn't sleep. I said, what, what do I do? I told them five
years. But one thing I knew how to solve that, because I made the teeth. So this is the other things
maybe I will catch up. One day I come, they gave me a box of jewelry, I didn't know where to start,
beginning with. I struggled the whole day. Five o'clock I came into the office, I was shaking he took
the all the jewelry, he, he, he checked it out, he says to me, Philip, it seems to me like you have only
three years experience, not five. I heard this, I was very happy, I said, well, I'm not adjusted to
this place, I don't know where the chemicals are and I don't know where, what is what. He said this
is enough for me, tomorrow you can come to start to work. I came the next day and after three months,
not full three months, he made me manager of the place. So this is after the war, you know, things you
know, over there.
Thanks Philip. Can we go back to your escape? How did you meet the Partizans?
After I escaped?
Yes.
I met the Partizans eh, they, eh, one eh the Polish family told us in the, if I go to this area,
to the, those woods, forest, (?) Partizans, they are, and, and they'll, they'll, they'll
take you in, because we had already weapons from the Germans that we took away.
And they wanted them
And, yes, and, and, eh, we joined them and they took us, they, they send us on mission
to, to, to mine the railroad tracks, to mine, for the transportation. And we did a lot
of things, but we, we overheard not good things, about anti-Semitism, that, that, they
were not happy with us. So we we, we, we, we feared for our lives. So we, we, we managed,
we, we decided to, to leave the Partizans. We escaped. And we escaped in all directions
to the village, where, where I came from. You know? And eh it's eh
Were you scared to be betrayed by the Polish peasants?
We were always afraid the Polish despite, you know, despite that I was saved by Polish family, but
eh the, the situation in Poland was not, not conducive to, to the Jewish. They ha, they have, many
of them collaborated with the Germans. Many Poles. When I speak in Poland in the universities I speak
the good things and the bad things. You know? It does, does, many of them helped Jews and many of them
collaborated with the German and took us to the Germans to be killed. So eh is eh and eh I, I'm under
the impression that they, they made the, the death camps in Poland because they had their full cooperation.
Because Poland was anti-Semitism was very strong in Poland. So eh but I have now, I have good relations
with the Polish students, I speak in the universities in Krakau, Warsaw, now I am going to Gdansk and
Wałęsa wants to meet me. I have good experience with the Polish young people and I, they learn from
me and I learn from them. You know? That to, to build a better world, because in Sobibor we were fighting
not only for our lives, we are fighting for a world without genocide. A world without anti-Semitism.
But now we are building new Sobibors. In Africa, like in Darfour, hundreds of thousands of people were
killed because of religion. And eh even, eh Iran is building nuclear bombs for the same reasons for
the German build crematoriums.
Yes
So we have to be on guard for any manifestation of anti-Semitism and genocide and
to be, to build a better world. This is, that's, that's why I, that's
Absolutely
why I go to places, I go all over the world and I speak and to, and to tell the story not,
not all, not many of the survivors, they don't want to go to Poland, they don't want to
speak about eh, about the, about their experiences in the, in the camps. It's very difficult
to go, to go to remember the experiences. But I am on a different opinion. I disagree with
them. I think we have to learn, we have to teach the new generation. You know?
Absolutely. I'm still thinking about your escape, Philip. Which you touched very
short in your wonderful story. Eh when you are talking about the good side of the
Polish, there were Poles who did hide you and protected you. Eh, can you describe
the situation when you were in hiding? Was it a cellar, was it a hole?
Oh, the, the we were hiding, we, we had a, we had underground underground we had a place. Maybe twelve
by twelve cubic meter and eh and they brought us they brought us food The food, they, they brought in
a pail like, like they go for, to milk wo, like they want to milk eh for the cow so the neighbors shouldn't,
shouldn't shouldn't notice something wrong. And at night we went out to exercises. You know. And
also mine eh, the, the family, they were vo, they were very poor. So they didn't have any money, so
we, we wanted to give him, to help him. We had we had those, some gold pieces. From, we took, (?) I was
working with millions of dollars of jewelry, so Simcha told me to take something along. So eh so we,
my, s, we made it s, so that he shouldn't, they shouldn't know that we have, we have jewelry. So
many often they, they, they killed the people, you know, many, many they
For that reason
took him in, they took him in and they killed him. So I'm, I made it with my brother that he disappeared
for the whole, for the whole day and night. You know? He was hiding in the in the barn. But he goes
to the pharmacy in Izbica to get money. They owned the money. And then the bread, we, we, we brought
the money, you know and they, and they and eh (?) he went just for, for a short time. just to exchange,
exchange the, the, the, the gold for, for Polish money and we gave him the money, they shouldn't
be, he shouldn't be eh he shouldn't have any eh doubt, that we have some jewelry, you know. Because
we were afraid too, despite they helped us. But you know
You had to be careful
the jewelry, it's, it's eh magnetism, you know. So we had to be careful.
But you trusted the pharma (?) cie
So it's, eh, no it's a very tempting, what I remember. When we were liberated for the, from, from
the, by the Russians we, we stopped eh, we stopped a Polish farmer with, it's in my book, and he should
take us to Zamość and we, eh we put the, we put some stuff, our belongings, what we have, whatever
we have, we went to get the rest of the, we came out, he disappeared. He ran away with the, with the,
with the horses I think. So we went, we went down the, the, the road and the, the front was maybe about
four, five kilometers away, was the, the, the the, the, the fighting (?) from the Germans so we, eh,
the officer came out, a major, came out on the from the truck and he speaks to us Jewish. A Russian
eh, a Jewish officer. So we tell him what hap, we told him what happened. They put away our stuff and
he ran away. So he says go on the truck, we went on the truck, he made a U-turn, you know, those road
they're almost, they almost over turned, and maybe by, by a couple of kilometers away, he caught the
guy with the things. So first of all he went over them, he beat him up a little bit, he didn't shot
them, and the told us like, he told us they're to, to, to, to, it was, was, was, was, was all covered
with straw. He opened up (?) we opened up, there is a whole cow, in, in, in four parts, a leg, a whole
cow. He was, he was taking the cow some place for sale. He said take the whole cow and put it on the
truck. You know? I was weighing 65 pounds and I, I have, I cannot, they, take eh a cow, the, I don't
have any strength, you know (laughs) we, we, we struggled, we took the whole four parts from the cow
and we put it on the truck, you know and our belongings, so he was, eh, so eh, and eh, so I was thin,
eh thinking he was taking now to Zamość. Where is he taking? He is taking us to the front, he has
to deliver the, the supplies.
Yes
And the Katyushas (makes whistling sound), oh, we had survived Sobibor, here are, here I am on the
front, you know, here I'm going to die, you know. For him it's nothing, we go, they go on the
fire, you know. We came to the, it's, it's like I, it's like, like Stalingrad, the fighting
there. I figured I'm not going to come back here, I'm going to die here. Eh, we, we, now we have
to unload everything, it was, it was a big effort to load it and unloaded the cow, it's hundreds
of pounds. And after we unloaded, then they took us back to Zamość. This is a episode right after,
after it's a good epis right after the war, you know. They took us to Zamość.
And in Zamość, what happened in Zamość?
Samozc, like I mentioned in the, they arrested me and they throw
That's in Zamość
I, they throw in a grenade, you know. And I was living a little
bit in Zamość then, we we went eh, we went to Berlin
Went to Berlin
to Lublin, to a big city and from there I went to eh, we stayed there, we living
in a little bit, but till, till I could manage to go to, to Berlin.
I have another question. Did Simcha trust the pharmacist in Izbica when you were in hiding?
In Izbi
Yes
he was not
Sim, Simcha
he was not working in
Simcha is
in, during the, eh, he does not work in the pharmacy, he was
No, I'm, I'm asking you a different question, sorry
Yes, yes
You said eh you exchanged jewelry for money at the pharmacy
Oh, this, this is at, when we were hiding in
Yes
b, in the barn. With the Polish family
Was that in Izbica?
He went to, Izbica is only three kilometers away.
okay
He walked, he walked to the Izbica, at night
But he trusted the pharmacist?
Huh?
Did he trust
Did, yes, the pharmacy he trusted, he knew him because he sold them many times, gold, jewelry,
gold eh pieces, yes, he, he trusted him because eh, he knew him well, you know. As a, as
a pharmacist. And he, he, he told him to be careful what happened you know. So it's eh,
he was some Poles were okay, like I say, it's, eh, good and bad ones.
Like, like in any nationality, but in Poland was a little more. Poland has a history
You came to New York, you got two children by your first wife,
she passed away, you got three children by your second wife
Yes
Your daughter
I don't have to tell what happened to my, about the, my, this is what
happened to my second wife. Maybe I had two wives, that's it.
Yes, of course
First wife, and then, then we met and a second wife, it is eh
And you separated
Yes
and
we divorced, the second wife eh, so it is
And you are a single now and everybody likes you
I won't say everybody, it's, it's, it's a compliment my (?) just joking,
comple, I eh I, I feel very good to be, to be surrounding with many friends.
Sure
You know? And I have flexibility.
Now, did you always work as a jeweler or as a management in jewelry, did you remain in it
Well, that I, like I mentioned before, mine job, I was in the dental line, dental
Yes, you did
and after the dental I switched to jewelry, you have my whole eh story about the jewelry I gave you
Absolutely
and then eh, after eh, I was working within the jewelry for a few years, I went eh in business
for myself. Manufacturing jewelry. And then eh, and now now I'm busy lecturing.
Yes, sure
So now I have a fulltime jec, lecturing, but I still eh have contact in the jewelry business,
if somebody needs something I still can get the good prices. Like half the price from eh whatever,
whatever it is in the store. So it keeps me occupied between the jewelry and the lecturing. And
I try to educate the people, especial the new generation. You know. About my inspirational experiences
and to, to build a new world. Because the world is still profoundly broken. And we have to fix
it, but you don't know how to begin with. You know? It's eh, we have to Sobibor should be
a lesson. For everybody. How we fought back, the injustice.
Can I ask you a question about your story: what happened to your father?
My father
because your father is nowhere in your story
My father, like I mentioned, he was, my father was very
eh, very involved in the Jewish community in Izbica
Hmhm
because of eh, he also was a business, he was in the business very eh, eh anerkennt, anerkennt, (?)
Yes
you speak German too, huh?
Yes, sure
And he, he was very liked in the business circles and eh, he tried to help people as best as
possible, like I mentioned he gave money to buy food for the Shabbat, for, for, for, the, for
the poor people and eh but he did not he refused to join the Judenrat. During the war.
He was asked?
Yes. He was active in Izbica but eh, did not, no, no, Judenrat he didn't want to join because
he figured the Judenrat had to take orders from the Germans, so it's to, to to supply people,
thousands of people to go the, to the camps, you know. He didn't want to take part in it. But
he was taking, he, he was, he, he w, he was eh caught and they, and they took him in a train
to Belzec. And before Belzec he escaped from the train from the windows and he came back to Izbica
and the police, the Polish police caught him and they took him to to the Germans and, and then
he went to the transport to, to Sobibor. So my father eh went to Sobibor too. My mother was shot
in Izbica, my father went to Sobibor and my two sisters, my three sisters, and eh, two nie, nieces,
eh a niece and a nephew, they all went to Sobibor, perished. And, and hundreds of members of
the family (?) cousins, (?) so they all were perished so tragically. And eh sometimes, when I
go to Sobibor, when I stand before the the ashes (?)
The hill?
and I talk to myself, those people, which there perished, if they would be alive today, how much they
could contribute to the world, in medicine in every aspects of life, it would be a better, a better
place to live. And they all perished so tragically. And, and here I am being there as a teenager,
I survived Sobibor, what made me to survive, but maybe because I had a, had a, God gave me a mission
to teach the world. Because the the the the Holocaust was not done by God, the Holocaust was done
by people. You have eh good people and evil people. So they got, they got the overhand, you know,
the bad people. You know, the evil people and they, they created the Holocaust.
Philip, you have been eh at many trials about Sobibor, you have been a witness in many cases
Oh
can you
it's a very good
talk about that?
it's a good question. [scrapes throat] I came eh to a t,
I was invited to a trial to Hagen, Germany, on Frenzel
'62 huh?
Huh? Yes
When was it?
I think so '62. I think so. And I was
Was it '62 or '65?
I don't know exactly, but you, we can check it out.
We can check, yes.
The the trial was an eh, I c, when I came to Hagen, when I came to a hotel, I had a note on my desk.
And eh, and eh, the desk was say Mister Bialowicz my name is so and so and my husband's name is
Kiltwa, Killwagen. I am eh teacher of religion, she is professor, my husband, I don't know, he is
an architect or I don't remember exactly, I know, we are on the welcome committee, we know that
you are going to go through a very a, very anics, eh, very, very, not good experiences during the
trial. Unpleasant experiences during the trial, but we want to make you stay as pleasant as possible.
Seven o'clock we are coming to pick you up to our house. To, for dinner. Exactly like Germans, seven
o'clock they came exactly with their Mercedes, and they took me home.
And the, the, the table was decorated with, with, with porcelain and crystal like,
like I was being a, like, like, like I'll be a king, you know, the, the
Or, or family member
family member
I do this for family
Yes, yes, yes.
[laughs], sorry
Then I saw artifacts, Jewish artifacts all around the wall. So I asked them what is this? She
said to me I am a religious teacher and I collect artifacts. Religious artifacts. Okay. Then
she said I'm going to invite my parents to meet such a very important guest here  So I figured
her father will come and I will recognize him from Sobibor maybe. [laughs]
Okay, what happened?
So twenty minutes they came in, the father hugs me, hugged me, you know, he takes out, and then his
wife greeted me very nicely, he takes out the album and he shows me that he collects all the pictures
form the Jewish community in Hagen. Hagen. And eh he wants to take me over, he is restoring this,
the synagogue. He wants to show me how he's restoring the synagogue and I fi, I, I said to myself
this is Germans, I thought all the Germans are like eh, like Wagner or Frenzel
No they are not
that this is Germans and Mister Bialowicz, tomorrow we have tickets on opera,
to go. I was surprised you know? And they gave me a red carpet treatment.
Aha
During my trial. And I went to the trial. The trial was packed with students,
college students, university students, with eh, with high school students and
the trial started and Frenzel, he took eh the lawyer, he, he, he hired the best
lawyers because he had he had so much gold, so much jewelries, he had
He had enough money
money to hire the best lawyers. And the lawyer started to interrogate me like I was being
on trial. I asked the judge you brought me over as a witness? And how, who is on trial here,
or this, or this eh or this eh murderer? And to the lawyer I said if you put on a uniform
I might recognize you too. [laughs] He came over to, to, to me during the recess, he said,
Mister Bialowicz, I am not a Nazi, I have Jewish friends. I said the gold, eh Waldheim, the
general secretary of the United Nations also has Jewish friends. You know?
It was at that time
And he was
yes
he was eh big Nazi. And if you would speak to me, a survivor, a teenager, you have to speak to me
through silk and the judge told him to go easy with me. And I had to go through all the experiences
and I had to tell the story about that transport where I, when I pulled the woman, her skin remained
in my hands and I, and I couldn't continue, I got sick. The doctor came in to treat me.
Wagner?
The doctor.
Yes, yes, yes
The doctor, he came to treat me
Yes
and the Schumanns came over to me and they hugged me and said Mister Bialowicz it's not
our fault. This is all our grandparents, they are, we want to have a good relations with the
Jews. So you have you have so you have Germans and the, they, they say all the Germans, are
bad. I am of a different vision, I have said you have you have good Germans too. And the,
the, the, the judge told me that his two daughters are in a kibbutz in Israël.
That they are filled with Germans
The, the judge. Huh?
They are filled with Germans
At what?
The kibbutzim are filled with Germans
Yes? He told me, I said you see, I, so eh you see you see a judge, they send
their children to a kibbutz. So you can't judge that all the Germans, I think
all they're murderers, they should be persecuted, they should, they should
get, they should get eh what they be, what belongs to them. So we can
But what happened during the eh trial, I mean what was
At the trial, the trial, I I brought that episode what happened with Frenzel, how I was beaten,
how, how he mistreated the, the prisoners, how he mistreated the people that came with the
transports and eh and eh I had an episode that eh a friend of my was, was with my, in the barracks
with me, we, we, he, he was, he was sleeping one, one bed below me. And he
Frenzel?
he, no, one of my f, friends
Okay, okay, sorry
in the barracks where we, we used
sorry, I apologize, yes?
by the, by the, by, eh, eh by our living quarters. And once he came out to that eh, to
that magazine where I was sorting the food. Whatever I opened the food, was al the gold
with diamonds. That I had throw into the safe, like I mentioned, I throw in
In the toilet, yes
most of it into the toilet. He came in, he was, name is Mordechai, I should give him some food. So I
gave him was, was the, the, the, from Holland, was the, this, the jars with, with butter, you know?
With Holland I gave him, I gave him eh salami, I gave him eh different things a package, he walked out
and I, maybe eh two blocks away Frenzel caught him with the package. And I saw through the window that
he goes to, towards towards that magazine. So I figured he told him that I gave him this and he come,
he is taking into eh, to eh, to show me who, who, who gave you this. So I so I grabbed some jewelry
and I ran to the toilet. To hide, you know? And I w, and I was in the toilet there. And they eh, they
called my name. They called my name, I should immediately come to the so I figured this is the end of
my life. But I wanted to live. So it's still in my instinct, I want to live. Why should I do it, should
I throw my into the toilets, you know those pits, should I throw myself inside to the toilets or, or
to go back and face the consequences. I, I decided to go back. I came back, all the workers were standing
were standing in eh, lined up, and they're waiting for me. I figure they are waiting for me because
he's going to tell them that I gave him this. I came over and Frenzel asked him. Who gave you this
package? Here you have all the people here. Show them, show me who gave you this. So you know what he
said? He said he took it himself. So he saved my life, he saved all this lives, this was, I consider
this heroism. Because still today I pray for his soul. That he saved my life. And the, the judge asked
me what happened to, to him? On the trial. I said he took him away, I heard a shot and eh half an hour
later his clothing, this clothing, I saw it in his clothing. And, and, and, and then he said, and, and,
and at night he didn't sleep with me anymore. He was not there. So I gave fact I had to give hundred
percent facts what he did. That he committed a crime. So that's why, my testimony, the judge said
he was very makes
moved
makes him give eh the, the life imprisonment. Because it was a very powerful
testimony I gave. Powerful. And he got life imprisonment but he, then he, then
he got in the, he got out, because of sickness of this, you know how
like it is
the
like it is. Like it is.
So this is, this the trial eh
Were those hard periods, those
Huh?
tri, so, such a trial, was it a hard period? Was it difficult for you?
For me it was very difficult, I got sick in the, during the trial, they, the doctor had to treat
me. Because it was very difficult for me to go through all the experiences I went though what
I saw and especially when I was so young. And it had a very, very psychological effect on me.
I told the judge I still have night, nightmares. I wake up in screaming. Especially on that
transport. Other other episode we had with Wagner. You heard about Wagner?
Yes, sure
He was a bandit, eh he he, he, he needed satisfaction, something to happen, I should do something
against the prisoners. He took me and eh couple of other boys to empty a well.  Just empty a well,
just for nothing. And he throw in those pails on their head and the, the water came, came out with
blood. We, wet, because he opened up our skulls. This was his satisfaction. You know.
I don't understand completely
He took us to a well
Yes?
you know? To empty the well.
Yes
The water, to empty, to empty it.
And he was standing on the top and, and
And threw stones
with, with, with another guy, with a Polish, with a Jew, and he was
throwing in the, the empty pa, the empty pails, he threw in
Okay
on their heads, so they should empty the, the, in the water, the water became like blood,
red. This was his satisfaction. I te, I testified this in me, in the, at the trial.
It was
He was a
personal
he was a very bestia, bestialski, be, be, bestial. And eh once he took me after the transport,
when the transport came on the yard, people tried to hide to hide the jewelry, diamonds diamonds,
gold pieces under the sand, it was all sand, and then he was, he was the smartest, the Wagner,
smartest, intelligent and he knew this. That they were hi, probably were hiding the jewelry. He
took me, he took me one time to with him, around four o'clock in the afternoon to look for the,
for the jewels, I find jewels, I gave him and he find eh too but till today I could not understand
why he didn't shoot me, because he w, I, he could, he could have think that I'm going to tell
somebody for the other Germans will find out, you know, that I, that, that I gave him the jewelry
from the, from the, from under the sand and it was also a miracle that he didn't kill me. Because
after I got the jewelry, he could have take me to the death camp and and kill me. So I have many
miracles in life. In Sobibor and in Izbica.
But we were you were, you were so lucky. But we were talking about those trials.
After, Hagen was the only one and now Demjanjuk is the next one?
Demjanjuk, Demjanjuk's trial was very important for me to go and to testify.
Because eh [turning page] I want to read this to you, so it's
Do so
so let's put together
if you want to do so
what. Three months ago I went to Germany to Munich to testify on Demjanjuk's trial. He's accused
of having served in Sobibor as one of the Ukrainian guards during the six months when I was in Sobibor.
I was a prisoner in camp. I cannot recognize the, Mister Demjanjuk. But, eh nor can I rem, eh rec, remember
the faces of most of Sobibor guards. During the court proceeding I simply informed the German judges
that, that they, of the crimes that, that I witness at Sobibor. Including the tales of how the Ukrainian
guards routinely supervised beat and shot Jewish prisoners. Mister Demjanjuk's attorney defended his
client by saying that all Ukrainian guards at Sobibor were prisoners of war. Who would have been killed
by the Germans if they did not follow the orders. [leest deels teksten voor]But I believe that nobody
has the right to save his life by beating or shooting innocent men, women and children. There is always
a moral responsibility to resist anti moral act, anti moral order. If the court determines that Mister
Demjanjuk served as, at Sobibor, then justice demands that he be punished approx, proprietly. For not
resisting the orders that he received. Justice in this case will also send an important message to anyone
who cont, contemplates or repels to carry out genocide today and in the future. Indeed my survival means
very little if Hitler's legacy of genocide goes on. Or lives on. At Sobibor we did not only fight
for, for our lives and for revenge. Up, (?) or, or lives and for revenge, we also fought for a better
tomorrow. A better day, a better future, a world without racism and a world without genocide. My life
and the life of my five children and fifteen grandchildren are part of this better world. But even though
I helped to destroy the Sobibor of the Germans others have build new Sobibors. The systematic murder
of innocent human beings continues even in the 21st century. Genocide still occurs in parts of Africa
where hundreds of thousands of human beings have been murdered in recent years only because of their
race. I think you have it there already. [turns page] As peaceful people and human beings we must condemn
these acts just as we condemn Hitler's over sixty years ago. Of course we hope that our condemnation
will stop hatred and genocide. But at Sobibor we learned that sometimes we must defend ourselves against
the Hitlers of the, of the, of the, of the, our generation. Not just to make speeches and hope that
somebody else is listening. Just as I did in Sobibor, all of us must (?) or hope in our fighting spirit
to preserve both our lives and the lives of our fellow human beings. We cannot continue to abandon our
fellow human beings in their time of need. Sobibor stands of, forever as a warning of what happens when
we follow, we allow barbarism to grow out of control. I have more but it's, it's-
When did you start going back to Sobibor?
Huh?
When did you go back the first time to Sobibor?
I went back eh when I, we made a we made a documentary film Hunt for stolen war treasures. With
Michael York, from England. We went to, to look for these treasures, because I wa, I my brother
told me to put some, hid some, hide some jewelry in jars. In case we survive, you have something
to live from. So I, a few days before the uprising I took a big jar from the mother from Holland,
you know, I put in jewel, eh, diamonds, rubies and emeralds, maybe a million dollars. And I put
it underneath, by a tree. Maybe I, eh, by the, a couple feet low but they made, they made a f,
they made a film Hunt for stolen war treasures and some of the participants they were looking for
a trail from paintings, all kinds of things. But my part on the documentary what they showed all
over the world, was the best. I got, I, I, I got a review of the best, that the, the producer told
me. We went to and we took some people that went, it was under communism yet and we were hi, we
were looking, we are looking for the trees, where I have hidden the, older pine trees, you know,
after, after the, after the uprising they brought eh, they brought eh, some prisoners from Belzec
to destroy the, the Sobibor and they plant, and they, eh, and they planted eh pine trees. So I
was counting the, the branches. Because every year is a branch. And I figured, I, it's no so
many branches that will mean this is a new tree.
Yes
If it's more branches, that's an old tree. But the same time I said if we find it, the, the Germans,
with the Poles, eh, eh, the communist will take it away. But eh we couldn't find anything. So I made
a statement, this the, the old ter, the old terrain changed. Most of the, most often I think that they,
the Poles, they, they, they, they were digging, they took everything out. But, but if, if we find something,
this this eh, this, be, eh, if, if, if there is something, this, it belongs to the 250,000 people that
perished. And we left. And then, then we went we went to to Izbica to the cemetery. So we came after
Izbica in the cemetery we were shocked. All skeletons, all bones, all, all, all, all, all, all over.
A Polish guy, I was holding a skeleton, she said, this could be your mother, when they, were shot.
She was shot here. I was very, very, I was very emotional. And they may filmed it. This when they showed
it all over the world, I got, I got, they call me, I got letter, telegrams you know? About that episode.
I took, and I took that skeleton and I took some bones, I made a package and I figured I'll take
it to to eh, to, to New York, and gave it eh, eh a religious burial, you know, all the human bones.
And when I came to Frankfurt I went through the machine a young guy, he went, oh, and he want to call
the police. That I killed somebody, you know, the bones. You know, I said to him, listen, we would,
I got emotional, I said I was crying, I said this is my family. And he, and, and, and he got emotional
too. He said he can loose his job, but he's going to let me through with it, because he knows how
I feel and I took, I took the package to New York. In New York they didn't check me and I, and I,
we took ten people, we made a minyan, you know? And we made a religious, a religious ceremony and the,
and there were have a, we, every city in New York has (?) from Izbica, they have a little, they have
a
Circle
(?) too and we bu, we gave it a burial. This is a very good, so it's, everything is in the
book. So you have my book and your books knowing everything, we have two books the same.
No, mine is not going to be a book. Eh
Huh?
This is not going to be a book, eh I'm thinking
I think you have, you have, you have already too much information. So eh, it's eh (?)
So what did you learn
Huh?
no, I'm, I'm going to back to Demjanjuk, I want to look for a good way
to finish, eh you went to Munich to testify, I have seen you. You were
Demjanjuk
very, very strong
you, you were on the, you were at the trial?
Yes, I was sitting upstairs
You saw Demjanjuk, he's laying like a, he is laying, he makes believe that he's
sick with the, with the, with the, eh, with eh baseball cap on his face, you know
Yes
and eh and he, he he, I, I mentioned in the, mine in mine eh, to the,
to the judges, that he didn't come to Sobibor for vacation.
No
He came for a purpose. He came to commit genocide. Beating and shooting. So
even if I don't recognize his face, but if he was there, he participated.
In all the, in all the atrocities and he should be, he should be eh
Punished
penalized accordingly.
Yes.
So any, any penalty what he will get, would, it wouldn't be enough. But what, what Sobibor, what Sobibor
stands for, what, what, what, what happened in Sobibor. Every day in Sobibor was a challenge to survive.
You know. And if, be a witness to, to what happened in Sobibor and to to be able to to survive and to
tell the story, and I hope mine stories will, will contribute to a better world.
Thank you Philip, thank you.
You ha, you have, you have t